=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

time-stats - Aggregate B<time>(1) output using statistics

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<time-stats> [I<OPTION>]... [I<FILE>]...

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Aggregate GNU time (or similar) output across multiple runs and display a
statistical overview of the values.

=head2 Bash Redirection

The bash built-in command must be part of a construct in order to redirect the
C<time> output.  For example, while C<< time true 2>&1 | time-stats >> will not
work, the following commands will:

	$ { time true; } 2>&1 | time-stats
	$ ( time true ) 2>&1 | time-stats
	$ for i in 1; do time true; done 2>&1 | time-stats
	$ until time true; do echo; done 2>&1 | time-stats

=head1 OPTIONS

=head2 Generic Program Information

=over

=item C<--help>, C<-?>

Output a usage message and exit.

=item C<--version>

Output version information and exit.

=back

=head2 Information Selection

=over

=item C<< --fields=<fields> >>

A comma separated list of fields to display, when applicable.

If a field is excluded by another selection option (see C<--const> and
C<--no-partial>), the field is omitted from the output.  When this option is
given, the eligible fields are displayed in the order given, with one field per
line.

If this option is not given, all of the available (and eligible) fields are
displayed.

See L</FIELDS> for the list of available fields.

=item C<< --stats=<stats> >>

A comma-separated list of statistical values to display, when applicable.

If a stat is not valid for a particular field, it is omitted I<for that field>.
The valid stats are displayed in the order given.  In the default mode, the
stats are separated by tabs and prefixed with C<$symbol=>, where C<$symbol>
indicates the stat.  If C<--table> is given, an ASCII table will be created
instead.  If the value is valid for a particular field, but undefined, it will
be displayed as "ω" (by default) or "d.n.e." (with C<--table>).

If this option is not given, the median, mean, & standard deviation are shown.

See L</STATS> for the list of available statistics.

=item C<< --const >>

Show fields with constant values.

By default, if all of the values for a field are identical (e.g. the machine
page size), the field is omitted from the output.  This option disables that
behavior.

=item C<< --no-partial >>

Hide fields that are missing values.

If a field is unavailable in at least one of the parsed B<time>(1) outputs
then, by default, the field is suffixed with the count of entries for that
field (using C<n=> in the default layout and adding a C<count> column with
C<--table>).

This option will, instead, omit the field from the output.  Thus, when this
option is given, the extra C<n=> or C<count> column will never appear.

=back

=head2 Parsing time format

=over

=item C<< --format=<format> >>

Additional B<time>(1) outputs to recognize and parse.  Can be specified more
than once.

See the GNU time documentation for the format string syntax.  Use the same
format string as was used to create the time output in the first place.  To
avoid parsing errors, formats should have non-numeric values between the
outputs.  For example, C<%e%U%S> would have parsing issues, but C<%e,%U,%S>
would not.

=item C<--no-recognize-standard-formats>

Don't recognize B<time>(1) output from the built-in Bash command, along with
the pre-defined formats of GNU time (i.e. the default, `-p`, & `-v` formats).
Only the formats specified in the given C<--format> option(s) will be detected.

=back

=head2 Presentation format

=over

=item C<< --table >>

Present the statistics in a table, without using short hands notation.  This
format is designed to be more human-readable, with field descriptions instead
of short names.

Undefined values are presented as "d.n.e.", while invalid statistics are left
empty in the table (e.g. there is no median for "cmd"; it's not a number).

=item C<< --dump-entries >>

Dump all the data collected instead of aggregating it.  This is for debugging
the C<--format> option and is otherwise pretty useless.

=back

=head1 FIELDS

The field descriptions mostly come from the GNU time(1) man page.  However, the
field names themselves are unique to this command.

=head2 Time

=over

=item real (C<%e>, C<%E>)

B<Ratio.> Elapsed real time (in seconds).

=item sys (C<%S>)

B<Ratio.> Total number of CPU-seconds that the process spent in kernel mode.

=item user (C<%U>)

B<Ratio.> Total number of CPU-seconds that the process spent in user mode.

=item cpu (C<%P>)

Percentage of the CPU that this job got.

=back

=head2 Memory

=over

=item max_rss (C<%M>)

B<Ratio.> Maximum resident set size of the process during its lifetime, in
Kbytes.

=item rss (C<%t>)

B<Ratio.> Average resident set size of the process, in Kbytes.

=item total (C<%K>)

B<Ratio.> Average total (data+stack+text) memory use of the process, in Kbytes.

=item data (C<%D>)

B<Ratio.> Average size of the process's unshared data area, in Kbytes.

=item stack (C<%p>)

B<Ratio.> Average size of the process's unshared stack space, in Kbytes.

=item text (C<%X>)

B<Ratio.> Average size of the process's shared text space, in Kbytes.

=item page (C<%Z>)

B<Ratio.> System's page size, in bytes.  This is a per-system constant, but
varies between systems.

=item major (C<%F>)

B<Interval.> Number of major page faults that occurred while the process was
running.  These are faults where the page has to be read in from disk.

=item minor (C<%R>)

B<Interval.> Number of minor, or recoverable, page faults.  These are faults
for pages that are not valid but which have not yet been claimed by other
virtual pages.  Thus the data in the page is still valid but the system
tables must be updated.

=item swap (C<%W>)

B<Interval.> Number of times the process was swapped out of main memory.

=item switch (C<%c>)

B<Interval.> Number of times the process was context-switched involuntarily
(e.g. because the time slice expired).

=item wait (C<%w>)

B<Interval.> Number of waits: times that the program was context-switched
voluntarily, for instance while waiting for an I/O operation to complete.

=back

=head2 I/O

=over

=item in (C<%I>)

B<Interval.> Number of filesystem inputs by the process.

=item out (C<%O>)

B<Interval.> Number of filesystem outputs by the process.

=item recv (C<%r>)

B<Interval.> Number of socket messages received by the process.

=item send (C<%s>)

B<Interval.> Number of socket messages sent by the process.

=item sig (C<%k>)

B<Interval.> Number of signals delivered to the process.

=item cmd (C<%C>)

B<Nominal.> Name and command-line arguments of the command being timed.

=item exit (C<%x>)

B<Nominal.> Exit status of the command.

=item kill

B<Nominal.> Signal that caused the command to either stop or terminate.

This value is only provided by GNU time when it occurs.  It cannot be specified
in the C<--format> option on GNU time; thus, it does not have a format percent
code.

=back

=head1 STATS

Each stat for a field is shown on the field's line, separated by whitespace,
using a short symbol (often outside of ASCII) followed by an equals sign (=)
and the value, for a compact presentation.  Each symbol comes from a discipline
of mathematics (not always from statistics) for improved recognition among
statisticians.

When C<--table> is given, an ASCII table is used instead.  Longer, more human
friendly labels are also used instead of the C<$symbol=> format.

=head2 Nominal

Nominal fields are composed of simple labels; they are not comparable.  The
labels may be numbers but, in context, these numbers do not form a simply
ordered set.

For example, is C<SIGKILL> greater than C<SIGCHLD>?  The question cannot be
answered as the signals handle 2 different things entirely.  Replace the names
with numbers and they still can't be compared.

The following stats are available for nominal fields:

=over

=item count (C<n>)

The number of items being considered.  This value is shown on the first line
and represents the total number of matches found.  If a field doesn't appear in
every match, then the count of how often I<that> field exists is shown in
parenthesis at the end of the line.

In table format, the count column automatically appears if any of the fields
has fewer than the total number specified at the top of the table.  In that
case, each field is populated with its count.

=item mode (C<Mo>)

The item that appears most often, if one exists.  If a tie occurs, the mode is
undefined (C<ω> or C<d.n.e.>).

=back

=head2 Real Values

The fields that are not nominal contain integer or real numbers (ones that
aren't substitutes for labels).

These fields can use all of the stats from L<Nominal> plus all the following:

=head3 Ordinal

=over

=item max (C<⊤>)

The maximum value for a field.

C<⊤> comes from abstract algebra and is often used to represent the top (or
largest) element of a lattice.

=item min (C<⊥>)

The minimum value for a field.

C<⊥> comes from abstract algebra and is often used to represent the bottom (or
smallest) element of a lattice.

=item maxdex (C<⊤ₓ>)

The 0-based index of the maximum value for a field.

The C<ₓ> subscript is often used to indicate we want the index.

=item mindex (C<⊥ₓ>)

The 0-based index of the minimum value for a field.

The C<ₓ> subscript is often used to indicate we want the index.

=item median (C<x͂>)

The "middle" value for a field.  This is sometimes more useful than the mean
(average), as it's not as easily skewed by extreme outliers and may provide a
more "typical" value.

C<x͂> is commonly used in statistics for median.

=back

=head3 Interval

=over

=item sum (C<Σ>)

The total of all values for a field added together.

C<Σ> comes from the n-ary summation operator.

=item mean (C<μ>)

The arithmetic average of all values for a field.

C<μ> and C<x̅> are commonly used in statistics for mean; the former is more
visually distinct from the symbol used for median.

=item variance (C<σ²>)

The amount of variation, or dispersion, for a field.

C<σ²> is commonly used in statistics for variance.

B<Note:> The units for variance are squared; however, units are not shown in
the display, so this may not be obvious.

=item standard_deviation (C<σ>)

The amount of variation, or dispersion, for a field.  This uses the same units
as the mean.

C<σ> is commonly used in statistics for standard deviation.

=back

=head3 Ratio

=over

=item geometric_mean (C<G>)

...

C<G> is commonly used in statistics for geometric means.

=item harmonic_mean (C<H>)

...

C<H> is commonly used in statistics for harmonic means.

=item skewness (C<γ₁>)

...

C<γ₁> is commonly used in statistics for skewness.

=item kertosis (C<κ>)

...

C<κ> is commonly used in statistics for kertosis.

=back

=head1 REPORTING BUGS

Report found issues at https://github.com/ColMelvin/time-stats/issues.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2017-2018  Chris Lindee

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<time>(1)

=cut
